>> Woodruff: THE LEADER OF
IRAQ'S KURDISH REGION TOLD U.S.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
TODAY, "WE ARE FACING A NEW
REALITY AND A NEW IRAQ," AS
SUNNI EXTREMISTS THREATEN TO
BRING THE COUNTRY TO THE
BREAKING POINT.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS ON ASSIGNMENT.
ALSO AHEAD, A NEW ROUND OF
FIREWORKS ON CAPITOL HILL, OVER
THE I.R.S.'S TREATMENT OF
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
AND THE APPARENT LOSS OF A TROVE
OF EMAILS FROM ONE OF THE
CONTROVERSY'S CENTRAL FIGURES.
PLUS, OUR LOOK BACK 50 YEARS, TO
THE DEEPLY SEGREGATED
MISSISSIPPI OF 1964.
AND THE YOUNG PEOPLE WHO CAME
FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY THAT
"FREEDOM SUMMER" TO LEND THEIR
HANDS IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST
RACISM.
>> WHITE SUPREMACY AND BLACK
SUBORDINATION RULED NOT JUST IN
MISSISSIPPI BUT ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
SO WE WERE PART OF THE EVENTS
THAT ACTUALLY BROUGHT THAT
CONSTITUTIONAL ERA TO AN END.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. HOMELAND
SECURITY DEPARTMENT IS SENDING
MORE AGENTS TO THE MEXICAN
BORDER TO HANDLE A SURGE OF
THOUSANDS OF UNDOCUMENTED
CHILDREN.
SECRETARY JEH JOHNSON TOLD
CONGRESS TODAY THAT 115
EXPERIENCED AGENTS HAVE DEPLOYED
TO THE RIO GRANDE VALLEY, AND
ANOTHER 150 MAY JOIN THEM.
REPUBLICAN REPRESENTATIVE
PATRICK MEEHAN OF PENNSYLVANIA
ASKED WHAT'S BEING DONE TO GET
THE CHILDREN HOME, SAFELY.
>> WE'RE TALKING ABOUT CHILDREN
AS YOUNG AS FIVE AND SEVEN YEARS
OLD.
THIS IS A HUMANITARIAN ISSUE.
SO, WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
SOMEONE WHO IS DESPERATE TO BE
REUNITED WITH HER MOTHER OR
FATHER IN THE UNITED STATES I
THINK AS AMERICANS WE NEED TO BE
CAREFUL ABOUT HOW WE TREAT THESE
KIDS.
>> WE ALL GET IT.
THIS IS WHAT'S SO DIFFICULT
ABOUT THIS.
WE'RE DEALING WITH CHILDREN AND
WE GET IT, BUT WE OUGHT NOT BE
LEAVING AMERICAN PEOPLE WITH THE
FALSE IMPRESSION THAT SOMEHOW
THE SYSTEM IS GOING TO WORK, AND
IS ACTUALLY GOING TO LEAD TO
REMOVALS ONCE THOSE CHILDREN ARE
HERE THEY'RE STAYING HERE.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE, THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTED THE
GOVERNMENT PLANS TO USE A 55,000
SQUARE FOOT WAREHOUSE IN SOUTH
TEXAS TO PROCESS THE CHILDREN.
ISLAMIST FIGHTERS IN NIGERIA
HAVE KIDNAPPED ANOTHER 60 GIRLS
AND WOMEN, PLUS 31 BOYS.
WITNESSES SAID TODAY THE BOKO
HARAM ATTACKS CAME OVER THE
WEEKEND, IN THE NORTHEAST, BUT
SECURITY FORCES DENIED
ANYTHING HAPPENED.
MORE THAN 200 SCHOOLGIRLS WERE
ABDUCTED IN THAT REGION LAST
APRIL AND ARE STILL MISSING.
REBELS IN EASTERN UKRAINE SHOT
DOWN ANOTHER MILITARY HELICOPTER
TODAY, KILLING NINE SOLDIERS.
IT HAPPENED JUST A DAY AFTER THE
PRO-RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS PLEDGED
TO RESPECT A CEASE-FIRE.
MEANWHILE, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN MOVED TO CANCEL A
DECREE AUTHORIZING HIM TO USE
FORCE INSIDE UKRAINE.
IN EGYPT, THE NEWLY ELECTED
PRESIDENT IS REJECTING CALLS TO
PARDON THREE AL-JAZEERA
JOURNALISTS.
THEY WERE SENTENCED YESTERDAY TO
SEVEN YEARS IN PRISON ON CHARGES
OF AIDING A "TERRORISM
ORGANIZATION," THE NOW-OUTLAWED
MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD.
TODAY, PRESIDENT ABDEL FATTAH
EL-SISI ADDRESSED THE ISSUE IN A
NATIONALLY TELEVISED SPEECH.
>> ( translated ): I CALLED THE
MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND I TOLD
HIM ONE WORD: WE WILL NOT
INTERFERE IN JUDICIAL MATTERS
BECAUSE THE EGYPTIAN JUDICIARY
IS AN INDEPENDENT AND EXALTED
JUDICIARY, IF WE DESIRE STRONG
STATE INSTITUTIONS WE MUST
RESPECT COURT RULINGS AND NOT
COMMENT ON THEM EVEN IF OTHERS
DON'T UNDERSTAND THESE RULINGS.
>> Woodruff: THE UNITED STATES,
AUSTRALIA AND OTHERS CONDEMNED
THE COURT VERDICTS AND APPEALED
TO SISI TO USE HIS LEGAL
AUTHORITY TO PARDON THE
JOURNALISTS.
A BRITISH JURY DELIVERED ITS
VERDICTS TODAY IN THE SCANDAL
OVER HACKING THE PHONES OF
POLITICIANS, CELEBRITIES AND
EVEN A MURDER VICTIM.
ONE FORMER EDITOR OF THE "NEWS
OF THE WORLD" TABLOID, ANDY
COULSON, WAS CONVICTED, WHILE
ANOTHER, REBEKAH BROOKS, WAS
ACQUITTED.
ANDY DAVIES OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: OUT OF THE OLD
BAILEY HE WALKS AND INTO THE
MIDST OF AN INDUSTRY WHICH ONCE
SO EMPOWERED HIM.
ANDY COULSON, THE FORMER TABLOID
BOSS, FORMER PRIME MINISTERIAL
AIDE, THIS EVENING, LEAVING
COURT IN THE KNOWLEDGE HE MAY
NOW FACE PRISON OVER HIS ROLE IN
THE PHONE HACKING SCANDAL.
WHAT A CONTRAST THEN FOR THE
PRIME MINISTER'S OLD FRIEND AND
ANDY COULSON'S FORMER LOVER
REBEKAH BROOKS
THE WOMAN WHOSE BARRISTER SAID
HAD BEEN THE SUBJECT OF A WITCH-
HUNT.
CLEARED TODAY OF ALL THE CHARGES
AGAINST HER.
AND LEAVING COURT WITH HER
HUSBAND CHARLIE, ALSO ACQUITTED.
HE JUST LOOKED STRAIGHT AHEAD.
REBECCA BROOKS WITH HER HUSBAND
CHARLIE ON ONE SIDE OF HER, AT
THE FIRST OF THE THREE GUILTY
VERDICTS, LOOKED AT THE JURY AND
SMILED.
REBECCA BROOKS' HUSBAND CHARLIE
HAD ALSO BEEN ACCUSED OF A
COVERUP.
OF A COMPLICATED PLOT TO HIDE
LAPTOPS AND DOCUMENTS IN AN
UNDERGROUND CAR PARK FROM
POLICE.
HE SAID IT WAS TO HIDE
EMBARRASSING PORNOGRAPHY.
THE JURY TODAY CLEARED BOTH HIM
AND THE FORMER NEWS
INTERNATIONAL HEAD OF SECURITY
MARK HANNA OF PERVERTING THE
COURSE OF JUSTICE.
FOR ANDY COULSON THIS TRIAL
ISN'T OVER JUST YET.
THE JURY ARE STILL CONSIDERING
THEIR VERDICTS IN RELATION TO
TWO OTHER CHARGES, THESE INVOLVE
ALLEGATIONS THAT HE AUTHORIZED
ONE OF HIS JOURNALISTS TO MAKE
ILLEGAL PAYMENTS TO POLICE
OFFICERS, ACCUSATIONS HE'S
DENIED.
>> Woodruff: THE OUTCRY OVER
PHONE HACKING LED THE MURDOCH
MEDIA EMPIRE TO SHUT DOWN "NEWS
OF THE WORLD" IN 2011, AFTER 168
YEARS IN BUSINESS.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, IT WAS
SHOWDOWN DAY FOR TWO
CONGRESSIONAL VETERANS, AS SEVEN
STATES HELD PRIMARIES, AND
FLORIDA, A SPECIAL ELECTION.
THE HEADLINE RACE WAS IN
MISSISSIPPI, WHERE SIX-TERM
REPUBLICAN SENATOR THAD COCHRAN
FACED TEA-PARTY CANDIDATE CHRIS
MCDANIEL IN A RUNOFF.
IN NEW YORK, DEMOCRAT CHARLIE
RANGEL, WHO'S BEEN IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES FOR 44 YEARS,
TRIED TO STAVE OFF A STRONG
PRIMARY CHALLENGE.
SUB-PAR EARNINGS REPORTS AND
WORRIES ABOUT IRAQ WEIGHED ON
WALL STREET TODAY.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 119 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,818.
THE NASDAQ FELL 18 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,350.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 SLID 12
POINTS, TO FINISH UNDER 1,950.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
THE U.S. PRESSES IRAQ'S KURDS TO
HELP PREVENT THE COUNTRY'S
SPLINTERING;
SCRUTINY OF THE I.R.S. FOR
EMAILS GONE MISSING;
VLADIMIR PUTIN HINTS AT
HOW THE "FREEDOM SUMMER" OF '64
CHANGED THE NATION'S VIEW OF
RACE;
AND NEW RESEARCH ON THE BENEFITS
OF READING TO VERY YOUNG
CHILDREN.
>> Woodruff: SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY PUSHED AHEAD AGAIN
TODAY TO HELP SAVE IRAQ FROM
COLLAPSE, RETURNING TO THE
COUNTRY AND PLEADING WITH A
MAJOR POLITICAL FIGURE TO HELP
KEEP THE STATE INTACT.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS KERRY'S
FIRST TRIP TO THE KURDISH
REGIONS OF IRAQ AS SECRETARY OF
STATE, AN EMERGENCY VISIT IN THE
FACE OF THE MILITARY ONSLAUGHT
BY ISIL, THE "ISLAMIC STATE IN
IRAQ AND THE LEVANT."
KERRY MET WITH KURDISH PRESIDENT
MASSOUD BARZANI, URGING HIM TO
SUPPORT EFFORTS IN BAGHDAD TO
FORM A NEW GOVERNMENT.
>> IN RECENT DAYS, THE SECURITY
COOPERATION BETWEEN THE FORCES
HERE IN THE KURDISH AREA HAS
BEEN REALLY CRITICAL IN HELPING
TO DRAW A LINE WITH RESPECT TO
I.S.I.L. AND ALSO TO PROVIDE
SOME SUPPORT TO THE IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES.
>> Woodruff: BUT BARZANI MADE IT
CLEAR THE CENTURY-OLD IDEA OF A
SINGLE, UNIFIED STATE OF IRAQ
MIGHT BE A THING OF THE PAST.
>> ( translated ): YOUR VISIT
COMES AT A VERY IMPORTANT TIME,
AND THIS IS IMPORTANT FOR US TO
EXCHANGE VIEWS ABOUT THE CURRENT
DEVELOPMENTS THAT THE ENTIRE
REGION IS FACING, ESPECIALLY
IRAQ.
THIS NEEDS THE SUPPORT OF ALL
CONCERNED IN ORDER TO FIND A
PROPER SOLUTION FOR THE CRISIS
THAT IRAQ IS WITNESSING TODAY.
AFTER THESE CHANGES, WE ARE
FACING A NEW REALITY AND A NEW
IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: THAT NEW IRAQ, IN
THE EYES OF MANY KURDS, WILL NOT
INCLUDE THEM: THEY'VE HAD
AUTONOMY SINCE THE 1991 GULF
WAR, AND THE ENSUING U.S. AIR
CAMPAIGN TO PROTECT THEM FROM
SADDAM HUSSEIN.
BARZANI REITERATED TODAY HE
PLANS AN INDEPENDENCE REFERENDUM
THAT COULD HAVE MAJOR REGIONAL
IMPLICATIONS: KURDS LIVE NOT
ONLY IN IRAQ BUT IN SOUTHEASTERN
TURKEY, NORTHERN SYRIA AND IN
IRAN.
IN THE MEANTIME, THE KURDS'
FORMIDABLE MILITARY FORCE, THE
PESHMERGA, ARE ACTING AS A
BULWARK AGAINST ISIL INSURGENTS
IN NORTHERN IRAQ.
THEY'VE ALSO CEMENTED THEIR
CONTROL OF KIRKUK, A VITAL OIL-
PRODUCING CENTER.
ELSEWHERE, IRAQI ARMED FORCES
CLAIMED TODAY TO HAVE RETAKEN
FROM ISIL IRAQ'S LARGEST OIL
REFINERY, AT BAIJI, AND TWO
POSTS ON IT'S WESTERN BORDER.
>> ( translated ): WE AFFIRM
THAT THE REFINERY IS NOW UNDER
COMPLETE CONTROL OF THE SECURITY
FORCES AND HAVE REGAINED FULL
CONTROL OVER TURAIBIL AND AL-
WALEED BORDER CROSSINGS AND WE
HAVE REINFORCED OUR TROOPS
THERE.
THE GREAT THING WAS THE SUPPORT
AND BACKING OF THE TRIBES OF
ANBAR PROVINCE.
>> Woodruff: FIGHTING HAS RAGED
AROUND BAIJI FOR A WEEK, AND THE
SUNNI TRIBES HAVE BECOME
INTERLOCUTORS BETWEEN THE SUNNI
ISIL FORCES AND THE LARGELY
SHIITE-LED IRAQI GOVERNMENT
FORCES.
BUT AS CHAOS SPREADS,
NEIGHBORING JORDAN HAS
REINFORCED ITS BORDER WITH IRAQ
WITH ARMORED VEHICLES AND
TROOPS.
AND THE FIRST OF 300 U.S.
SPECIAL FORCES ADVISORS BEGAN
ARRIVING ON MONDAY.
MEANWHILE, THE UNITED NATIONS
ESTIMATED MORE THAN 1,000 PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN KILLED IN TWO WEEKS OF
FIGHTING, BUT IT WARNED THAT
NUMBER IS VERY MUCH A MINIMUM.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE ON THE
SITUATION IN IRAQ WE TURN TO TWO
FORMER ARMY OFFICERS WHO SERVED
IN THAT COUNTRY.
RETIRED COLONEL DEREK HARVEY WAS
AN INTELLIGENCE OFFICER AND
SPECIAL ADVISOR TO THE COMMANDER
OF U.S. FORCES IN IRAQ, GENERAL
DAVID PETRAEUS.
HE'S NOW A PROFESSOR OF PRACTICE
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH
FLORIDA.
AND RETIRED LIEUTENANT COLONEL
DOUGLAS OLLIVANT HAD TWO TOURS
IN IRAQ.
HE WAS ALSO THE DIRECTOR FOR
IRAQ ON THE NATIONAL SECURITY
COUNCIL DURING THE PRESIDENCIES
OF GEORGE W. BUSH AND BARACK
OBAMA.
HE'S NOW A MANAGING PARTNER IN A
CONSULTING COMPANY WHICH DOES
BUSINESS IN IRAQ.
WE WELCOME YOU BOTH TO THE
"NEWSHOUR."
>> GOOD TO BE HERE.
JUST GIVE US YOUR UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE STRENGTH AND
WEAKNESSES ARE OF THE IRAQI
ARMY, WHO'S IN IT, ROUGHLY
SPEAKING, AND HAS IT BEEN HAVING
SO MUCH DIFFICULTY?
>> WELL, THE CURRENT SITUATION,
THE DETERIORATION BEGAN WITH THE
PROBLEMS IN MOSUL, AND THE
PROBLEMS IN MOSUL AND THEN THE
PROVINCE, THEY HAD POOR
COMMANDERS, THEY HAD A SECTARIAN
AGENDA VIEWED AS MALIKI'S
MILITIA BY MOST TO HAVE THE
SUNNI ARABS IN THE PROVINCE.
POOR TRAINING, POOR PRACTICES.
OVER THE PAST YEAR, IMPORTANTLY,
I THINK WE NEED TO KEEP IN MIND
THATHAT I. I.S.I.L. HAD IT IN MO
UNDERMINE THE POLICE AND SET THE
STAGE FOR WHAT BECAME THIS
CAMPAIGN, THIS OFFENSIVE WE SAW
START A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU
ADD TO THAT?
>> I THINK DEREK HAS IT MORE OR
LESS RIGHT.
THE SIMPLEST EXPLANATION IS THAT
THE IRAQI ARMY JUST ISN'T VERY
GOOD IN THIS PARTICULAR REGION.
BUT IF WE LOOK CLOSER, THERE
WERE A LOT OF SUNNI SOLDIERS IN
THE DIVISION IN THE NORTH, AND
THERE'S TWO FLAVORS OF WHY THAT
COULD GO WRONG.
THERE'S A CON SPI CONSPIRATORIAL
VERSION, JUST AT A SOCIOLOGICAL
LEVEL, IF YOU ARE A SUNNI MEMBER
OF THE IRAQI ARMY AND YOU SEE
EXTENDED MEMBERS OF YOUR FAMILY
OR TRIBE OR MOSQUE FIGHTING
AGAINST YOU, YOU ARE MORE LIKELY
TO GO HOME AND NOT PARTICIPATE
IN THE CONFLICT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT WHAT
COL. HARVEY SAID THAT I.S.I.L.
STARTED PLANTING SEEDS OF THIS
SOMETIME AGO, AS MUCH AS A YEAR
AGO AGO?
>> HE HAS DIFFERENT INFORMATION
THAN I DO.
THAT'S CERTAINLY NOT PLAUSIBLE.
IT'S POSSIBLE THEY DID THAT AND
WOULD FIT IN THE WITH THE IDEA
THEY HAVE BEEN BUYING OFF THE
RIGHT COMMANDERS OVER TIME.
>> THE CENTRALIZATION OF COMMAND
AND CONTROL AND THE MANAGEMENT
OF THE OPERATIONAL LEVEL OF WAR
FOR THE IRAQI ARMY DID NOT ALLOW
THE OPERATIONAL COMMANDERS TO
HAVE THE FLEXIBILITY AND AJILLTY
TO RESPOND AND, IN FACT, THEY
WERE, IN EFFECT, BLIND TO WHAT
WAS GOING ON ONCE THIS BEGAN TO
UNRAVEL.
SO THE INABILITY TO HAVE A
COMMAND AND CONTROL SYSTEM, TO
SYNCHRONIZE A RESPONSE TO THE
I.S.I.L. OFFENSIVE WAS A MAJOR
FACTOR.
>> Woodruff: SOUNDS LIKE A
NUMBER OF THINGS WERE GOING
WRONG AT THE SAME TIME.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Woodruff: COL. OLLIVANT,
U.S. MILITARY AIDS ARE JUST NOW
ARRIVING.
HOW WILL THEY CHANGE WHAT'S
GOING ON?
>> I SUSPECT WE'LL HAVE A
COMBINATION OF DELTA FORCE AND
SEALS AND REGULAR GREEN BERET
TYPES WHO WILL GIVE ADVICE.
MORE IMPORTANTLY, DEREK AND I
WERE TALKING EARLIER, I THINK WE
WOULD MORE CALL THEM OBSERVERS
THAN ADVISORS AT THIS POINT.
THEY'RE THERE TO ESSENTIALLY
GATHER INFORMATION FOR US BOTH
ABOUT HOW I.S.I.L. IS DOING ON
THE FIELD.
THEY WILL BE IN THE BRIGADE
HEADQUARTERS OF THE IRAQI ARMY.
>> Woodruff: NOT ON THE FRONT
LINE.
>> THE BRIGADE HEADQUARTERS IS A
LITTLE FURTHER BACK, USUALLY IN
OFFICES, NOT CLOSE TO THE BATTLE
LINES, BUT THEY WILL BE ABLE TO
TALK TO THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
TALKING TO THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
FIGHTING I.S.I.L., GET A
SECONDHAND VERSION OF WHAT'S
GOING ON AT THE FRONT LINES AND
I THINK, EVEN MORE IMPORTANTLY,
LOOK AROUND AS -- AT THE IRAQI
ARMY UNITS THEY'RE WITH AND
DETERMINE THEIR CAPABILITIES.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT DOES THAT
BRING TO THE U.S. IN TERMS OF
DECISION-MAKING?
>> WELL, IT BRINGS, FOR US,
INFORMATION AND AWARENESS ABOUT
WHAT IS GOING ON THERE AT THIS
POINT IN TIME.
BUT, JUDY, MY MAJOR CONCERN WITH
THIS IS THAT THE IRAQI ARMY AND
POLICE ARE BEING AUGMENTED BY A
MOBILIZED SHIA MILITIA AND
INTEGRATED INTO THESE COMMANDS
OVERIRAQI ARMY DIVISIONS AND
POLICE BRIGADES, AND THAT IS OF
CONCERN BECAUSE I THINK BEHIND
THE SHIA MILITIAS, IRAN'S
GENERAL IS MANAGING AND
ORCHESTRATING THIS INTEGRATION
AND HE'S THE SAME COMMANDER THAT
MANAGED THE CAMPAIGN IN SYRIA
AGAINST THE SYRIAN ARMY AND
OTHER RESISTANT PLOVPTS.
>> Woodruff: YOU SEE A STRONG
HAND BY IRAN IN ALL OF THIS?
>> Reporter: THEY ARE HELPING
COORDINATE THE DEFENSE IN
BAGHDAD AND INTEGRATING THE
MILITIAS.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU SEE
THE TWO SIDES FACING OFF?
>> Reporter: OFF?
BAGHDAD HAS BEEN FORCED TO
LEAN ON IRAN.
THE UNITED STATES HAS TWO
NATIONAL INTERESTS, ONE IS IN
DEFEATING I.S.I.L. AND THE OTHER
IS PRESERVING THE TERRITORIAL
INTEGRITY OF IRAQ.
BETWEEN US AND THE IRANIANS,
THERE'S NO WIDE SPACE ON THESE
ISSUES.
>> Woodruff: I WANT TO ASK
ABOUT JORDAN, BECAUSE WE
MENTIONED THERE ARE TROOPS IN
JORDAN MOBILIZING OPENED THE
BORDER AND THEY'RE WORRIED
WHAT'S GOING ON INSIDE THEIR
COUNTRY ON BEHALF OF I.S.I.S.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THAT?
>> I.S.I.L. IS A MULTI-STATE
PROBLEM IN SYRIA, IRAQ, AND IS
TRYING TO BUILD ITS CAPABILITY
IN JORDAN, AND IN JORDAN THEY
HAVE RECRUITING VIDEOS OUT, THEY
HAVE PROPAGANDA AND THEY ARE
SAYING THAT JORDAN IS NEXT, THAT
THE KINGDOM WILL FALL AND THEY
WILL LIBERATE THE PEOPLE OF
JORDAN.
>> Woodruff: COL. , HOW DOES
THAT EFFECT WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
IRAQ?
DOES IT SPREAD I.S.I.L. MORE
THINLY OR WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
>> I THINK THEY'RE ATTRACTING
MORE KURDS IN TERMS OF WHAT
THEY'RE LOSING IN CASUALTIES IN
OCCUPYING THE TERRITORY.
I.S.I.L. IS A PROTO-STATE.
THEY CONTROL TERRITORY, THEY
HAVE AN ARMY, THEY HAVE A
POLITICAL FORM.
IT'S ALL VERY PRIMITIVE, MIND
YOU, BUT IT'S A REAL LING.
AND EVEN IF WE COULD WAVE A
MAGIC WAND AND FIX IRAQ
TOMORROW, THEY STILL HAVE
DESIGNS ON JORDAN, LEBANON,
ISRAEL AND EVENTUALLY AN SAUDI
ARABIA AND TURKEY.
WE HAVE A REAL NATIONAL INTEREST
IN COUNTERING THE THREAT.
>> Woodruff: TO CLARIFY,
HARVEY, YOU'RE MORE CONCERNED
ABOUT THE IRAN INFLUENCE ON
BEHALF OF THE IRAQI LEADERSHIP?
>> I AM MORE CONCERNED ABOUT
I.S.I.L. AND ITS EFFECT ON THE
REGION AND LONG-TERM ASPIRATIONS
AGAINST THE UNITED STATES,
WESTERN INTERESTS AND THE MORE
STABLE COUNTRIES IN THE REGION.
THE COMPLICATING FACTOR FOR US
IS THE MOBILIZATION OF THE SHIA
AND IRAN'S PRESENCE THERE.
IF WE'RE GOING TO GET ENGAGED,
HOW DO THOSE ISSUES GET WORKED
OUT?
>> Woodruff: GOOD QUESTIONS IN
REMINDING US JUST HOW
COMPLICATED THIS IS.
COLONEL HAVE HARVEY, COLONEL
OLLIVANT, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: THE POLITICAL FIGHT
OVER THE INTERNAL REVENUE
SERVICE'S TARGETING OF
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS GOT A LOT
MORE HEATED OVER THE PAST FEW
DAYS.
THE I.R.S. SAYS IT LOST TWO
YEARS WORTH OF EMAILS FROM A
FORMER OFFICIAL AT THE HEART OF
THE SCANDAL.
IN TWO CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS
OVER THE PAST FOUR DAYS,
REPUBLICANS ON CAPITOL HILL HAVE
LASHED OUT AT I.R.S.
COMMISSIONER JOHN KOSKINEN,
ALLEGING A COVER-UP AT THE
HIGHEST LEVELS.
KOSKINEN JOINED THE AGENCY SIX
MONTHS AGO AFTER IT FOUND ITSELF
EMBROILED IN THE CONTROVERSY.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR REPORT.
>> WOULD YOU PLEASE RISE TO TAKE
THE OATH?
RAISE YOUR RIGHT HAND.
A LITTLE HIGHER.
THANK YOU.
>> Brown: EVEN THE OATH-TAKING
SEEMED CONTENTIOUS LAST NIGHT,
AS I.R.S. COMMISSIONER JOHN
KOSKINEN APPEARED BEFORE THE
HOUSE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
>> WE HAVE A PROBLEM WITH YOU
AND YOU HAVE A PROBLEM WITH
MAINTAINING YOUR CREDIBILITY.
>> Brown: AT ISSUE: LOST E-MAILS
FROM FORMER I.R.S. OFFICIAL LOIS
LERNER.
SHE RESIGNED LAST YEAR AFTER
DISCLOSURES THAT HER DIVISION
TARGETED TEA PARTY AND OTHER
GROUPS FOR REVIEWS BEFORE THE
2012 ELECTION.
THE CONTROVERSY REVIVED THIS
MONTH, WHEN THE
I.R.S. REPORTED THOUSANDS OF
LERNER'S E-MAILS VANISHED WHEN
HER COMPUTER CRASHED, IN 2011.
CALIFORNIA REPUBLICAN DARRELL
ISSA CHAIRED LAST NIGHT'S
HEARING.
>> SO YOU TOLD US THAT ALL
EMAILS WOULD BE PROVIDED.
WHEN YOU DISCOVERED THAT ALL
EMAILS WOULD NOT BE PROVIDED YOU
DID NOT COME BACK AND INFORM US.
IS THAT CORRECT?
>> ALL THE EMAILS WE HAVE WILL
BE PROVIDED.
I DID NOT SAY I WOULD PROVIDE
YOU EMAILS THAT DISAPPEARED.
IF YOU HAVE A MAGICAL WAY FOR ME
TO DO THAT, I'D BE HAPPY TO KNOW
ABOUT IT.
I SAID I WOULD PROVIDE ALL THE
EMAILS.
WE ARE PROVIDING ALL THE EMAILS.
>> Brown: KOSKINEN HAD AN
EQUALLY TESTY EXCHANGE WITH OHIO
REPUBLICAN MICHAEL TURNER, WHO
PRESSED FOR AN F.B.I.
INVESTIGATION.
>> I REJECT THE SUGGESTION THAT
MY INTEGRITY DEPENDS UPON MY
CALLING THE F.B.I. THE INSPECTOR
GENERAL WILL ISSUE A REPORT.
WE WILL ALL GET THE BENEFIT OF
THAT REPORT.
AND THEN WE CAN DETERMINE WHAT
THE APPROPRIATE ACTION IS TO BE.
>> I HAVE ALWAYS BELIEVED THAT
WHAT HAPPENED IN YOUR AGENCY
WITH LOIS LERNER IS A CRIME.
I BELIEVE THAT THERE WERE OTHERS
INVOLVED.
I BELIEVE THE EMAILS THAT ARE
MISSING ARE THE ONES THAT WOULD
PROBABLY GIVE US AN ABILITY TO
ESTABLISH THAT.
AND I BELIEVE THAT SOMEBODY
UNDERTOOK CRIMINAL ACT IN ITS
DESTRUCTION.
>> Brown: THINGS WERE EVEN MORE
HEATED FRIDAY, AT A WAYS AND
MEANS COMMITTEE HEARING, WHEN
REPUBLICAN PAUL RYAN ACCUSED
KOSKINEN OF LYING.
>> THIS IS A PATTERN OF ABUSE, A
PATTERN THAT IS NOT GIVING US
ANY CONFIDENCE THAT SAYS THIS
AGENCY IS BEING IMPARTIAL.
>> I HAVE A LONG CAREER THAT'S
THE FIRST TIME ANYBODY HAS SAID
THEY DO NOT BELIEVE ME.
>> I DON'T BELIEVE YOU.
>> THAT'S FINE WE CAN HAVE A
DISAGREEMENT.
I AM WILLING TO STAND ON OUR
RECORD.
>> Brown: DEMOCRATS CHARGE
REPUBLICANS ARE SIMPLY OUT TO
SCORE POLITICAL POINTS.
THIS WAS MARYLAND CONGRESSMAN
ELIJAH CUMMINGS LAST NIGHT.
>> REPUBLICANS HAVE BEEN TRYING
DESPERATELY AND UNSUCCESSFULLY
FOR MORE THAN A YEAR TO LINK
THIS SCANDAL TO THE WHITE HOUSE.
RATHER THAN CONTINUE ON THIS
PATH, I SINCERELY HOPE THAT WE
WILL TURN TO CONSTRUCTIVE
LEGISLATION OF CONCRETE
SOLUTIONS TO HELP FEDERAL
AGENCIES RUN MORE EFFECTIVELY
AND EFFICIENTLY.
>> Brown: THE OVERSIGHT
COMMITTEE RECONVENED THIS
MORNING, WITH THE GOVERNMENT'S
TOP ARCHIVIST, DAVID FERRIERO.
MICHIGAN REPUBLICAN TIM WALBERG
CITED A LAW REQUIRING THE I.R.S.
TO REPORT THE LOST E-MAILS MUCH
EARLIER.
>> DID THEY BREAK THE LAW?
>> I'M NOT A LAWYER.
>> BUT YOU ADMINISTER THE
FEDERAL RECORDS ACT?
>> I DO.
>> IF THEY DIDN'T FOLLOW IT, CAN
WE SAFELY ASSUME THEY BROKE THE
LAW?
>> THEY DID NOT FOLLOW THE LAW.
>> Brown: THE PANEL ALSO HEARD
FROM JENNIFER O'CONNOR, A WHITE
HOUSE COUNSEL WHO WORKED AT THE
I.R.S. FOR SIX MONTHS LAST YEAR.
SHE APPEARED AFTER BEING
SUBPOENAED.
AWAY FROM THE HEARING, HOUSE
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER SAID
CHARGED IT'S CLEAR THE WHITE
HOUSE IS NOT COOPERATING.
HE TOLD REPORTERS, "THEY HAVEN'T
DONE A DAMN THING" TO HELP GET
TO THE TRUTH.
>> Brown: WITH US NOW ARE TWO
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO'VE TAKEN
PART IN THESE HEARINGS:
SANDER LEVIN, A DEMOCRAT FROM
MICHIGAN AND THE RANKING MEMBER
OF THE HOUSE WAYS AND MEANS
COMMITTEE.
AND JOHN MICA, A FLORIDA
REPUBLICAN WHO SERVES ON THE
HOUSE OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
CONGRESSMAN MICA, LET'S START
WITH YOU AND THE E-MAILS.
DO YOU AND OTHER REPUBLICANS
BELIEVE THEY WERE INTENTIONALLY
DESTROYED?
IS THERE SOLID EVIDENCE TO THAT
EFFECT?
>> WE HONESTLY DON'T KNOW, AND
THAT'S THE REASON WE CALLED IN
THE COMMISSIONER, CALLED HIM
BACK, WHEN HE TESTIFIED IN MARCH
TO GOVERNMENT REFORMENT
OVERSIGHT, HE NEVER CITED ANY
TECHNICAL PROBLEMS, AND
EVERYONE, REPUBLICAN AND
DEMOCRAT, SAID WE JUST WANT THE
E-MAILS FROM LOIS LERNER.
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN PRODUCED.
I THINK EVERYONE WAS EQUALLY
SHOCKED IN CONGRESS AND ACROSS
THE COUNTRY THAT THAT
INFORMATION WAS EITHER DESTROYED
OR MISSING.
WE DON'T KNOW HOW IT OCCURRED.
>> Brown: CONGRESSMAN LEVIN,
WERE YOU SHOCKED?
BECAUSE YOU SAID IT WAS AN
EQUIPMENT FAILURE.
WHAT ABOUT THE QUESTIONS ABOUT
THE TIMING AND WHEN WE LEARNED
ABOUT IT AND WHY THERE WERE NO
BACKUPS.
>> I'M NOT SURE WHAT THE ISSUE
IS REGARDING BACKUPS, WHAT THE
I.R.S. HAD AT THE TIME.
I THINK IT'S CLEAR THERE HAS TO
BE A BETTER JOB IN I.R.S. AND
THROUGHOUT THIS GOVERNMENT.
THERE'S ZERO, ZERO EVIDENCE THAT
THERE WAS ANY INTENTIONAL EFFORT
BY LOIS LERNER OR BY ANYONE ELSE
AND, AT OUR HEARING, THERE WAS
DRAGGED OUT A LETTER GOING BACK
TO 2011, AND THE CLAIM WAS THAT
SHE WAS TIPPED OFF AND THEREFORE
THE IMPLICATION WAS THAT SHE
DESTROYED HER COMPUTER.
IT TURNED OUT THAT LETTER HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH THE
INAPPROPRIATE CRITERIA THAT WERE
BEING USED.
THEY WERE INAPPROPRIATE, AND I
SAID RIGHT AT THE BEGINNING WHEN
WE FOUND OUT ABOUT IT THAT THEY
SHOULD BE -- LERNER AND
MILLER -- RELIEVED OF THEIR
DUTIES.
>> Brown: JOHN MICA, THIS HAS
BECOME VERY PERSONAL.
JOHN KOSKINEN CAME IN AND WHY IS
HE A TARGET AND WHY IS THIS AN
ATTEMPT TO TIE THE WHITE HOUSE
TO THE SNIRS.
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, WE DON'T
KNOW AND WE JUST LEARNED WITHIN
A MATTER OF DAYS AGAIN ABOUT THE
DESTRUCTION OF THE TAPES.
IT'S NOT 18 MINUTES LIKE IN THE
NIXON WHITE HOUSE OR ROSEMARY
WOODS.
THIS IS 18 MONTHS.
WE LEARNED THERE WAS A BACKUP
SYSTEM.
I DON'T KNOW HOW MUCH
INFORMATION THEY HAVE.
UNFORTUNATELY THAT BACKUP SYSTEM
WHICH IS IN PLACE I THINK FROM
2005 TO WHAT WE'VE LEARNED TO
ABOUT 2011, I BELIEVE, IN THE
TIME FRAME THAT, AGAIN, SOME OF
THIS CAME DOWN, THAT COMPANY WAS
TERMINATED RIGHT AT ABOUT THE
TIME THAT SOME OF THIS, AGAIN,
OCCURRED.
SO WE'RE GOING TO SEE IF THERE
IS BACKUP INFORMATION.
WE'RE GOING TO FIND OUT WHO, IF
ANYONE, WAS RESPONSIBLE FOR WHAT
HAPPENED TO THE TAPES.
WE DON'T KNOW.
AGAIN, I THINK THE WHOLE COUNTRY
WAS STUNNED JUST A FEW DAYS AGO
TO FIND OUT THAT THIS
INFORMATION HAD CRASHED OR
DISAPPEARED.
>> Brown: SANDER LEVIN, FROM
YOUR SIDE, THE CHARGE HAS BEEN
THAT THE I.R.S. INCLUDING JOHN
KOSKINEN AS WELL AS THE
INFORMATION NEVER REALLY
ADDRESSED THE LARGER MATTER
BEHIND ALL THIS, THE QUESTION OF
TARGETING CONSERVATIVE GROUPS,
AN IT'S BEEN TREATED AS A MINOR
MATTER.
>> THAT'S NOT TRUE AT ALL.
BY THE WAY, YOU MENTIONED THE
EFFORTS TO TIE THIS TO THE WHITE
HOUSE -- THAT'S WHAT MR. MICA,
DAVE CAMP, SENATOR HATCH AND
OTHERS, THEY TALKED ABOUT DAVE
CAMP AT THIS FIRST HEARING
TALKED ABOUT A CULTURE OF
COVERUP WITHIN THE
ADMINISTRATION, ZERO EVIDENCE OF
THAT, AND THERE NEVER HAS BEEN
SUCH EVIDENCE.
AND WE NEVER SAID THAT THE USE
OF THESE INAPPROPRIATE CRITERIA,
THAT THAT USE WAS MINOR.
INDEED, AS I SAID EARLIER, I WAS
AMONG THE FIRST TO SAY THAT
THOSE IN RESPONSIBLE POSITIONS
SHOULD BE RELIEVED OF THEIR
RESPONSIBILITIES.
NO, THERE WERE INAPPROPRIATE
CRITERIA.
THEY APPLIED BOTH TO LIBERAL AND
CONSERVATIVE ORGANIZATIONS, MORE
TO CONSERVATIVE ORGANIZATIONS
BECAUSE THEY HAD FILED MANY MORE
APPLICATIONS FOR 501C4, AND
THERE IS A LEGITIMATE CONCERN
ABOUT THE USE OF 5 501C4s
BECAUSE THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO
RELATE TO SOCIAL WELFARE
REPREDOMINANTLY AND YOU HAVE IN
USE IN PUBLIC TODAY THE USE OF
501C4s FOR ESSENTIALLY
POLITICAL PURPOSES.
FROM 2006 TO 2012.
IN 2006, THERE WAS A MILLION
DOLLARS USED REPORTED FOR
POLITICAL PURPOSES, THAT JOINT
TO $250 MILLION BY 2012.
HALF OF IT FROM KARL ROVE AND
KOCH BROTHERS AND OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS.
SO THERE'S A LEGITIMATE CONCERN
BUT WE NEVER SAID THE USE OF
THIS CRITERIA INAPPROPRIATELY SO
WAS MINOR.
WE NEVER SAID THAT.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK
CONGRESSMAN MICA BRIEFLY, IF YOU
COULD.
IS THAT LARGER ISSUE BEING LOST
IN ALL THIS, THE QUESTION ABOUT
WHICH ORGANIZATION SHOULD
QUALIFY FOR TAX EXEMPT STATUS?
>> THAT'S A QUESTION FOR THE
WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEE AND OUR
TAX CODE.
THE QUESTION HERE WAS THE
TARGETING.
AN INDEPENDENT REVIEW WAS DONE
BY THE INSPECTOR GENERAL OF
TREASURY, INDEPENDENT AND HE
FOUND THAT THEY WERE TARGETING
HERE CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
NOW, WHETHER YOU'RE TARGETING
CONSERVATIVE OR AGGRESSIVE OR
LIBERAL GROUPS, THAT'S NOT
RIGHT, AND THAT'S PART OF WHAT I
THINK THE INVESTIGATION HAS
BOILED DOWN TO.
PEOPLE HOLD THE I.R.S. IN TRUST
BECAUSE IT'S OUR CHIEF FINANCIAL
REVENUE AGENT AND EVERYONE WANTS
TO BE TREATED FAIR BY THEM AND
TO HAVE THEM CLOSE DOWN SOME
POLITICAL GROUPS NO MATTER WHAT
THEIR PERSUASION BEFORE THE
ELECTION AND DRAUGHT DRAGGED
OUT, AGAIN, THE PROCESSING THEM
AND THEN GOING AFTER THEM.
MR. LEVIN'S POINT ABOUT THE
WHITE HOUSE, THE ONLY THING I'VE
SAID ON THE WHITE HOUSE IS THE
DIFFERENT INCONSISTENCIES.
THE COMMISSIONER AT THE TIME
TOLD US HE'D ONLY BEEN AT THE
WHITE HOUSE FOR THE EASTER EGG
ROLL THEN WE FOUND OUT HE'S BEEN
OVER A HUNDRED TIMES.
WE ALSO KNOW THAT THE WHITE
HOUSE COUNSEL AND CERTAIN PEOPLE
IN THE WHITE HOUSE WERE AWARE OF
WHAT WAS GOING ON.
SO, AGAIN, WE DON'T HAVE ANY
CLEAR EVIDENCE BECAUSE WE
HAVEN'T COMPLETED THE --
>> Brown: A BRIEF LAST WORD
FROM YOU, MR. LEVIN.
>> THEY SAY THERE'S NO EVIDENCE
THEN MAKE CHARGES.
THEY TALK ABOUT A CULTURE OF
COVERUP, A WHITE HOUSE ENEMY'S
LIST.
THERE'S BEEN ZERO, ZERO PROOF OF
THAT, AND THEY CONTINUE THIS
DESPERATE EFFORT TO CONNECT THIS
TO THE WHITE HOUSE, AND THEY
SHOULD STOP.
THIS SHOULD NOT BE AN
INQUISITION.
>> Brown: SANDER LEVIN AND
JOHN MICA, THANK YOU BOTH VERY
MUCH.
>> Woodruff: IN A CEREMONY ON
CAPITOL HILL TODAY,
CONGRESSIONAL LEADERS
COMMEMORATED THE 50TH
ANNIVERSARY OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT BY BESTOWING THE
CONGRESSIONAL MEDAL OF HONOR
POSTHUMOUSLY ON DR. MARTIN
LUTHER KING, JR, AND HIS WIFE,
CORETTA SCOTT KING.
NOW, WE REMEMBER ANOTHER PIVOTAL
MOMENT IN THE STRUGGLE FOR CIVIL
RIGHTS IN THE UNITED STATES.
THE EVENTS THAT TOOK PLACE THAT
SUMMER THAT CHANGED NOT ONLY THE
PLACE WHERE ACTIVISTS CONVERGED,
BUT THE ENTIRE COUNTRY.
GWEN HAS OUR LOOK BACK.
>> Ifill: FOR TEN WEEKS IN THE
SUMMER OF 1964, WELL OVER 1,000
COLLEGE STUDENTS, BLACK AND
WHITE, FROM AROUND THE COUNTRY
VOLUNTEERED TO GO TO DEEPLY
SEGREGATED MISSISSIPPI TO
REGISTER BLACK VOTERS, TEACH
YOUNG PEOPLE AND CREATE A NEW
POLITICAL PARTY.
ALONG THE WAY THEY ENCOUNTERED
HOSTILITY, VIOLENCE, ARRESTEST
AND EVEN MURDER.
50 YEARS LATER, FREEDOM SUMMER,
A NEW AMERICAN EXPERIENCE
DOCUMENTARY AIRING ON MOST PBS
STATIONS TELLS THE STORY.
STANLEY NELSON WROTE, PRODUCED
AND DIRECTED FREEDOM SUMMER
WHICH ALSO FEATURES TWO KEY
PLAYERS FROM THAT TIME, ROBERT
MOSES, THEN A LEADER IN THE
STUDENT NON-VIOLENT COORDINATING
COMMITTEE, AND THE ORGANIZER OF
FREEDOM SUMMER, AND BENDER, AN
ORGANIZER WHOSE HUSBAND WAS ONE
OF THREE CIVIL RIGHTS WORKING
KILLED WHEN THEY WENT SOUTH TO
INVESTIGATE THE BURNING OF A
BLACK CHURCH.
STANLEY, WHEN THE ORGANIZERS GOT
TO MISSISSIPPI, 90% OF ELIGIBLE
BLACK VOTERS WEREN'T ABLE TO
VOTE AND YOU WERE DRAWN TO THE
STORY, EVEN THOUGH YOU KIND OF
KNEW ABOUT IT, WHY?
>> WELL, I KIND OF HAD HEARD THE
STORY A LITTLE BIT, BUT I DIDN'T
KNOW IT, AND I THINK, YOU KNOW,
IT WAS THE OPPORTUNITY TO REALLY
TAKE ONE PIECE OF THIS CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT AND REALLY JUST
GET INTO IT.
AND I ALSO THINK IT WAS JUST A
REALLY IMPORTANT STORY BECAUSE
IT WAS ABOUT VOTING RIGHTS,
WHICH IS NOW DOUBLY IMPORTANT IN
THIS COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: STEPHANIE, I WANT TO
TAKE YOU BACK TO THE BEGINNINGS
OF THIS MOVEMENT THROUGH THE
EYES OF YOUR DOCUMENTARY, A
PORTION OF WHICH DEALS WITH
ROBERT MOSES AND HOW HE CAME TO
BE INVOLVED IN THIS.
LET'S TAKE A LOOK.
>> THE COMMON THEORY ABOUT
MISSISSIPPI WAS THAT YOU COULD
NOT ATTACK MISSISSIPPI FROM THE
INSIDE.
IT HAD TO BE ATTACKED FROM THE
OUTSIDE.
YOU HAD TO STAND AWAY AND SAY
THIS IS AN AWFUL PLACE AND IT
OUGHT TO FIX ITSELF.
BUT BOB MOSES AND THE STUDENT ON
VIOLENT COORDINATING COMMITTEE
SAID, NO, THAT'S NOT TRUE, WE
CAN DO IT OURSELVES.
>> BOB MOSES WAS A HIGH SCHOOL
TEACHER IN NEW YORK CITY.
HE WENT SOUTH IN 1960,
ORIGINALLY JUST FEELING HE HAD
TO GO, HAD TO GET INVOLVED.
HE WAS SEPTEMBER TO MISSISSIPPI.
HE -- HE WAS SENT TO MISSISSIPPI
AND WENT ON HIS ON IN THE RURAL
AREAS WHERE PEOPLE SIMPLY DIDN'T
GO AND CHALLENGE THE STATUS QUO.
>> WHAT MADE HIM STAND OUT WAS
NOT ONLY HIS SHEER COURAGE BUT
HIS CALM COURAGE.
I CAN'T TELL YOU THAT BOB MOSES
WAS AFRAID BECAUSE HE NEVER
SHOWED IT.
HE JUST WENT ABOUT HIS WORK, AND
THERE WAS THIS CALM SENSE OF
MISSION.
>> BOB WENT OVER THERE BY
HIMSELF IN 1961, AND BY THE END
OF '61, MAYBE THER
>> MISSISSIPPI SET ITSELF UP
THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY'S
HISTORY.
IT SET ITSELF UP THE NEXT YEAR
WHEN THE FREEDOM RIDERS WENT
THROUGH MISSISSIPPI, SAYING YOU
CAN COME IN BUT YOU CAN'T GET
OUT.
SO MISSISSIPPI KIND OF CHARGED
ITSELF WITH BEING THE REAL
OBSTACLE TO OVERCOME.
IT HAD DONE THAT.
>> Ifill: CERTAINLY ONEO THE
MOST ATTENTION-GETTING AND THE
PAL THROWN OVER THE MOVEMENT WAS
THE MURDER OF THE THREE CIVIL
RIGHTS WORKERS, AND THAT DREW
BENDER INTO THIS.
LET'S TAKE A LOOK AT HER
INVOLVEMENT.
>> THE WIFE OF MICKEY S SHWERNER
PUTS A FACE ON THEM AN AND SHOWS
WE NEED TO PAY ATTENTION TO
THESE REAL PEOPLE WHO SOMETHING
TERRIBLE HAPPENED TO.
>> SOMETHING HAPPENED AND I AM
GOING TO FIND THE ANSWER.
DRIVING EVERY BACK ROAD, EVERY
DIRT ROAD, EVERY ALLEY.
I WILL DO IT.
>> THE PRESS SWARMED OVER HERE
AND I THINK THEY WANTED HER TO
CRY AND THEY WANTED HER TO BE A
NEW WIDOW THAT THEY WOULD
CAPTURE AT HER WOODOHOOD AND SHE
WOULDN'T PLAY.
>> I PERSONALLY SUSPECT
MR. CHANEY, WHO IS A NAFFED
MISSISSIPPI NEGRO, IF HE HAD
BEEN ALONE AT THE TIME OF HIS
DISAPPEARANCE, THAT THIS CASE
LIKE SO MANY OTHERS WOULD HAVE
GONE COMPLETELY UNNOTICED.
>> Ifill: I HAVE TO ASK, DID
YOU KNOW WHAT YOU WERE GETTING
INTO?
>> I DON'T KNOW ANY OF US QUITE
KNEW WHAT WE WERE GETTING INTO.
MICKEY AND I HAD GONE TO
MISSISSIPPI IN JANUARY OF 1964.
I THINK THAT THE PEOPLE WHO
REALLY KNEW WHAT THIS WAS ALL
ABOUT WERE THE PEOPLE WHO LIVED
IN THAT STATE AND HAD PUT UP
WITH -- OR NOT PUT UP WITH BUT
EXPERIENCED THE VIOLENCE AND THE
THREATS AND THE BRUTALITY AND
THE MURDERS IN ALL THE YEARS
SINCE RECONSTRUCTION.
>> Ifill: ON SOME LEVEL, YOU
KNEW AS A WHITE WOMAN FROM
SOMEWHERE ELSE THAT YOU WOULD BE
ABLE TO GET ATTENTION FOR THE
CAUSE IN A WAY THAT THE PEOPLE
WHO LIVED IN MISSISSIPPI COULD
NOT?
>> I'M NOT SURE I THOUGHT OF IT
QUITE THAT WAY.
IT'S HARD, LOOKING BACK, TO SAY
THAT WAS THE MOTIVATING FACTOR.
I'M NOT SURE IT WAS.
>> Ifill: YOU WERE ABLE TO GET
INTO THE WHITE HOUSE AND TO MEET
WILL.B.J.
>> YES, BUT THAT'S AFTER THE
THREE WERE MISSING AND THERE WAS
ENORMOUS ATTENTION, AND THE
ENORMOUS ATTENTION WAS BECAUSE
TWO OF THE THREE MEN WERE WHITE.
NOBODY HAD PAID VERY MUCH
ATTENTION EITHER ON A NATIONAL
LEVEL OR LOCALLY WITH THE
MURDERS OF BLACK MEN AND OFTEN
CHILDREN WHO HAD BEEN --
MISSISSIPPI HAD THE HIGHEST RATE
OF LYNCHINGS IN THE ENTIRE
COUNTRY.
I THINK THERE WAS SOMETHING OVER
500 THAT WERE DOCUMENTED AND
THERE WERE PROBABLY MANY MORE
THAT NEVER MADE ANY KIND OF
RECOGNITION.
>> Ifill: STANLEY, AS YOU LOOK
AT THE DOCUMENTARY, YOU TALK
ABOUT THE FREEDOM SUMMER AND
VOLUNTEERS DOWN SOUTH BUT ALSO
THE POLITICAL PIECE OF THIS.
FANNY LOU, YOU HAVE VIDEO OF HER
SPEAKING.
>> WE TRAVELED TO THE COUNTY
COURTHOUSE IN INDIANOLA TO TRY
TO REGISTER TO BECOME
FIRST-CLASS CITIZENS.
WE WERE MET THERE BY
POLICEMEN --
>> Ifill: THAT TURNED INTO A
POLITICAL AS MUCH AS A SOCIAL
UPRISING.
>> YES, ONE OF THE PARTS OF
FREEDOM SUMMER THAT SOMETIMES
WASN'T TALKED ABOUT WAS THE
WHOLE CHALLENGE TO THE
DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL CONVENTION,
THE IDEA THAT MISSISSIPPI WOULD
SEND US SEPARATE DELEGATION TO
THE CONVENTION.
BASICALLY, THE BLACK PEOPLE
WOULD SEND A DELEGATION THAT
WOULD CHALLENGE THIS ALL-WHITE
DELEGATION THAT THE DEMOCRATIC
NATIONAL CONVENTION IN 1964
WHICH IS WHEN LYNDON JOHNSON WAS
GOING TO BE NOMINATED.
HE WANTED IT TO BE A CORONATION.
>> Ifill: YOU SHUT IT DOWN.
YEAH, AND IT'S ONE OF THE
MOST INCREDIBLE PIECES OF THE
FILM AND WE WERE SHOCKED TO FIND
THAT LYNDON JOHNSON RECORDED ALL
HIS PHONE CALLS AND THERE'S
AUDIO OF HIM WHEELING AND
DEALING TO STOP THIS ALTERNATE
DELEGATION TO THE CONVENTION AND
IT'S AMAZING.
>> Ifill: BOB MOSES, AS YOU
LOOK BACK 50 YEARS LATER, DO YOU
THINK YOU AWAKENED A SLEEPING
GIANT?
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT CAME TO BE
THE VERY NEXT YEAR, YOU GOT
CERTAINLY A LEVEL OF ATTENTION
PAID TO SOMETHING THAT PEOPLE
HAD IGNORED SO LONG.
>> TO SELL YOU THE TRUTH -- TO
TELL YOU THE TRUTH, I THINK WHAT
WE DID AS CAPPING A
CONSTITUTIONAL ERA IN WHICH
WHITE SUPREMACY AND BLACK
SUBORDINATION RULED NOT JUST IN
MISSISSIPPI BUT ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
AND WE WERE PART OF THE EVENTS
THAT ACTUALLY BROUGHT THAT
CONSTITUTIONAL ERA TO AN END.
I'M NOT GOING TO SAY WHAT ERA
WE'RE IN, NOW, RIGHT, BUT THAT
CONSTITUTIONAL ERA IS OVER.
>> Ifill: WELL, LET ME ASK
RITA BENDER, WHAT ERA ARE WE IN
NOW?
>> I'M NOT SURE OF THE TITLE,
BUT I'D SAY IT'S VERY TROUBLING
THAT, AFTER ALL THE YEARS OF
STRUGGLE, AFTER THE SIGNIFICANT
CHANGES THAT OCCURRED, THE RIGHT
TO VOTE WE THOUGHT WAS ONE,
ISSUES OF EDUCATION DENIAL WE
THOUGHT WERE GOING TO BE DEALT
WITH, AND NOW WE HAVE A CONGRESS
AND A SUPREME COURT THAT
ABSOLUTELY WILL NOT PAY
ATTENTION TO THE NEEDS OF THE
COUNTRY.
>> Ifill: STANLEY NELSON, AS
YOU COMPLETE THIS PROJECT AND AS
PBS VIEWERS WATCH IT, WHAT DO
YOU HOPE THEY TAKE AWAY AT THIS
MOMENT, THAT THERE ARE THINGS WE
CAN ACCOMPLISH THAT WE DON'T
THINK WE CAN OR THAT'S A NICE
MOMENT?
>> RIGHT.
I MADE A COUPLE OF HISTORICAL
FILMS AND THE ONLY REASON TO
MAKE THEM AND TO LOOK AT THEM IS
HOW THEY INFORM THE PRESENT, AND
I THINK THAT'S REALLY IMPORTANT.
YOU KNOW, FOR US TO UNDERSTAND
THAT THESE PEOPLE WHO ARE REALLY
YOUNG, MOST OF THEM, YOU KNOW,
AT THAT POINT, YOU KNOW, MADE
CHANGES IN THIS COUNTRY, AND
THEY MADE CHANGES BECAUSE THEY
TOOK THE POWER TO CHANGE.
THEY JUST DID IT, YOU KNOW.
AND IT STILL CAN BE DONE TODAY.
YOU KNOW, THERE'S MOVEMENTS THAT
EXIST.
IT'S NOT LIKE THERE'S NOTHING
THERE FOR PEOPLE TO BE PART OF
AND IT REALLY SHOWS THE POWER
THAT WE HAVE AND THE POWER THAT
YOUNG PEOPLE HAVE IN THIS
COUNTRY B.
THE ONE THING I WANT TO SAY IS I
DON'T KNOW OF ANY MOVEMENT
ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD THAT'S AN
OLD PEOPLE'S MOVEMENT.
IT'S ALWAYS YOUNG PEOPLE AND
THAT'S WHO I HOPE THIS FILM
REALLY INFLUENCES.
>> RITA BENDER, ROBERT MOSES,
PRODUCER OF FREEDOM SUMMER ON
PBS.
THANK YOU ALL FOR YOUR
CONTRIBUTION.
>> Woodruff: "AMERICAN
EXPERIENCE" WILL BE AIRING
"FREEDOM SUMMER" ON MOST P.B.S.
STATIONS THIS EVENING.
CHECK YOUR LOCAL LISTINGS.
ONLINE, LISTEN TO INTERVIEWS
FROM THOSE WHO WERE THERE AND
FROM TODAY'S STUDENTS WHO ARE
STUDYING THAT STRUGGLE, FIFTY
YEARS LATER.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, A NEW CALL
TO PARENTS AND OTHERS TODAY
ABOUT THE NEED FOR ROUTINE
READING TO THE YOUNGEST OF
CHILDREN, AND IT'S POTENTIAL
EFFECT ON LITERACY, LANGUAGE AND
WELL-BEING.
JEFF IS BACK WITH THAT.
>> WHERE'S THE DUCK?
>> Brown: THE NATION'S LARGEST
PEDIATRICIANS' GROUP IS NOW
FORMALLY URGING PARENTS TO READ
ALOUD TO THEIR CHILDREN, DAILY,
FROM INFANCY.
THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF
PEDIATRICS SAYS DOING SO
STIMULATES EARLY BRAIN
DEVELOPMENT AND HELPS BUILD KEY
LANGUAGE, LITERACY AND SOCIAL
SKILLS.
ACCORDING TO THE ACADEMY, MORE
THAN ONE IN THREE AMERICAN
CHILDREN START KINDERGARTEN
WITHOUT THE SKILLS THEY NEED TO
LEARN TO READ.
ABOUT TWO-THIRDS OF CHILDREN
CAN'T READ PROFICIENTLY BY THE
END OF THE THIRD GRADE.
>> DO YOU WANT TO PICK A BOOK?
>> Brown: THE ACADEMY IS URGING
PEDIATRICIANS TO PROVIDE BOOKS
TO LOW-INCOME FAMILIES.
IT'S ALSO TEAMING WITH OTHER
GROUPS, INCLUDING "REACH OUT AND
READ," A NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION
NEWSHOUR EDUCATION CORRESPONDENT
JOHN MERROW PROFILED IN NOVEMBER
2012.
>> THERE'S SOLID RESEARCH THAT
SHOWS THAT JUST THAT
INTERVENTION OF HANDING A FAMILY
A BOOK, GIVING THEM A COUPLE OF
AGE-APPROPRIATE PIECES OF ADVICE
ABOUT HOW TO READ WITH THEIR
KID, AND JUST ENCOURAGING
READING, THEY, THOSE KIDS WILL
DO BETTER IN SCHOOL.
>> Brown: "REACH OUT AND READ"
SERVES NEARLY 5,000 MEDICAL
CENTERS, AND MORE THAN A THIRD
OF ALL AMERICAN CHILDREN LIVING
IN POVERTY.
>> Brown: THE LEAD AUTHOR OF THE
NEW "LITERACY PROMOTION" REPORT
JOINS US NOW.
DR. PAMELA HIGH IS PROFESSOR OF
PEDIATRICS AT BROWN UNIVERSITY.
AND FORMER PRESIDENT OF THE
SOCIETY OF DEVELOPMENTAL AND
BEHAVIORAL PEDIATRICS.
WELCOME TO YOU.
FIRST, START BY EXPLAINING MORE
ABOUT WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO
ADDRESS HERE AND HOW SERIOUS AN
ISSUE THIS IS.
>> WHAT WE'RE ADDRESSING IS THAT
MANY PARENTS IN THE UNITED
STATES DON'T SEEM TO HAVE THE
KNOWLEDGE THAT THERE'S A
WONDERFUL OPPORTUNITY AVAILABLE
TO THEM STARTING VERY EARLY, AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THEM TO BEGIN
BUILDING THE CHILD'S LANGUAGE
DEVELOPMENT AND TO FORGE THEIR
OWN RELATIONSHIP WITH THEIR
CHILD THROUGH READING TO THEM ON
A REGULAR BASIS.
YOU KNOW, I WOULD ALSO SAY
TALKING TO THEM, SINGING WITH
THEM, PLAYING WITH THEM, ALL OF
THOSE KINDS OF THINGS.
>> Brown: IN SOME WAYS
CONFIRMING WHAT WE ALL KNEW OR
SUSPECTED?
WHAT IS IT ABOUT READING OR
BEING READ TO THAT -- WHAT DOES
IT DO FOR KIDS?
>> YOU KNOW, WHAT READING DOES
FOR VERY YOUNG CHILDREN IS IT
GIVES THEM A TIME WHEN THEY
PRETTY MUCH HAVE THE UNDIVIDED
ATTENTION OF THEIR PARENTS OR
THEIR CAREGIVERS.
IT'S A REAL ONE-ON-ONE
OPPORTUNITY FOR CHILDREN TO
COMMUNICATE WITH THEIR PARENTS
AND PARENTS TO COMMUNICATE WITH
THEIR CHILDREN.
YOU KNOW, WE KNOW THAT THE MORE
WORDS THAT ARE IN A CHILD'S
LANGUAGE WORLD, THE MORE WORDS
THEY LEARN AND THE STRONGER
THEIR LANGUAGE SKILLS ARE WHEN
THEY REACH KINDERGARTEN, THE
MORE PREPARED THEY ARE TO READ,
AND THE BETTER THEY READ THE
MORE LIKELY THEY'LL GRADUATE
FROM HIGH SCHOOL.
CHILDREN WITH VERY POOR READING
PROFICIENTIES BY THE TIME THEY
READ FOURTH GRADE ARE THE ONES
WITH GREATER RISK OF NOT
GRADUATING AND NOT BEING ABLE TO
BE SUCCESSFUL IN THEIR OWN LIFE
COURSE, ECONOMICALLY, FOR
EXAMPLE.
>> Brown: THOSE ARE THE KINDS
OF CONSEQUENCES YOU OUTLINE IN
THE REPORT, IN FACT, RIGHT, IS
ECONOMIC AND EVEN HEALTH ISSUES.
>> WE FRAME THIS -- WE FEEL THAT
THE POWER OF THE EXPERIENCE OF
READING TO CHILDREN IS REALLY
SEATED IN THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE PARENT AND THE
CHILD, THAT THIS IS THE WAY OF
BUILDING THAT RELATIONSHIP AND
WE DO KNOW FROM SCORES OF
INFORMATION THAT IT'S REALLY THE
PARENT-CHILD RELATIONSHIP,
NURTURING RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN
CAREGIVERS AND CHILDREN THAT SET
A POSITIVE LIFE COURSE, AND THIS
IS ONE MEDIUM FOR IT, TALKING
WITH THEM, BY EXPOSING THEM TO
LANGUAGE AND LITERACY EARLY ON
SO THEY'RE MOTIVATED SO, EVEN IF
IT'S HARD, YOUR CHILD WILL WANT
TO WORK IN ORDER TO LEARN HOW TO
READ THEMSELVES BECAUSE IT'S NOT
THAT EASY FOR ALL CHILDREN.
>> WHAT EXACTLY ARE YOU CALLING
ON DOCTORS, PEOPLE IN YOUR
PROFESSION TO DO?
HOW SHOULD THEY INCORPORATE THIS
INTO THEIR PRACTICE?
>> WELL, ACTUALLY, MANY
PEDIATRICIANS HAVE BEEN
INCORPORATING THIS INTO THEIR
PRACTICE NOW FOR ALMOST 20
YEARS.
IT'S THE REASON THAT WE HAVE A
LARGE BODY OF KNOWLEDGE THAT
TELLS US THE POWER OF THIS
INTERVENTION, AND THE WAY THAT
WE TRY TO DO IT, IN PARTICULAR
FOR FAMILIES OF LOWER INCOME
STATUS WHO ARE THE ONES AT
GREATEST RISK TO NOT HAVE THIS
INFORMATION AND POTENTIALLY NOT
TO HAVE THE TOOLS EITHER TO BE
ABLE TO SHARE A BOOK WITH THEIR
CHILD, IS THAT WHEN YOU TRY TO
HAVE A HIGH-QUALITY CHILDREN'S
BOOK AVAILABLE SO WE CAN USE IT
AS PART OF THE VISIT WITH THE
CHILD, SO YOU CAN USE IT FOR A
VEHICLE FOR SEEING HOW THAT
CHILD IS DEVELOPING.
FOR EXAMPLE, A
SIX--MONTH-OLD-OL-MONTH-OLD IS
LIKELY TO HOLD ON TO A BOOK, PUT
IT IN THEIR MOUTH, TASTE IT,
LOOK AT THE PICTURES FOR A
WHILE, NOT PAY TOO MUCH
ATTENTION.
AS THEY GET OLDER, THEY START
PATTING THE PICTURES.
BY A YEAR OR 15 MONTHS, THEY CAN
PROBABLY POINT TO SOME OF THE
PICTURES IN THEIR FAVORITE BOOK.
AS THEY GET OLDER THAN THAT,
THEY MAY EVEN BE ABLE TO POINT
OUT SOME LETTERS IN THE ALPHABET
OR TELL YOU THE STORY THAT'S IN
THE BOOK.
SO THE BOOK IS A VEHICLE FOR
ASSESSING HOW WELL THE CHILD IS
DOING DEVELOPMENTALLY.
IT'S ALSO CAN BE A VEHICLE FOR
ASSESSING A RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THE PARENT AND THE CHILD.
HOW COMFORTABLE IS THAT CHILD
SITTING IN THE PARENT'S LAP AND
SHARING THAT BOOK TOGETHER?
AND IF IT DOESN'T SEEM SO
COMFORTABLE, IT'S AN OPPORTUNITY
TO PERHAPS MODEL HOW TO DO IT
AND SHOW HOW MUCH FUN IT CAN BE.
>> WE'LL CONTINUE THIS
CONVERSATION ONLINE AND I WANT
TO ASK YOU QUESTIONS ABOUT
STRATEGIES FOR PARENTS.
WE'LL STOP FOR NOW.
DR. PAMELA HIGH, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
RETURNED TO IRAQ FOR A SECOND
DAY, URGING KURDISH LEADERS TO
HELP THE GOVERNMENT DEFEAT
ISLAMIST FIGHTERS.
BOKO HARAM MILITANTS IN NIGERIA
KIDNAPPED ANOTHER 60 GIRLS AND
WOMEN, PLUS 31 BOYS.
AND THE HEAD OF HOMELAND
SECURITY PLEDGED TO USE EVERY
LAWFUL OPTION TO COPE WITH A
FLOOD OF CHILDREN ENTERING THE
U.S. ILLEGALLY.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, A MICHIGAN MAN WHO MAKES
GUITARS DISCOVERS MUSIC HIDDEN
IN THE WRECKAGE OF DETROIT'S
ABANDONED BUILDINGS.
GARY ZIMNIKI HAND CRAFTS MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS USING RECLAIMED WOOD
TAKEN FROM VACANT HOUSES IN THE
CITY.
SEE AND HEAR WHAT IT'S ALL
ABOUT, IN OUR NEW ARTS SERIES
CALLED "LOCAL BEAT,"
HIGHLIGHTING STORIES FROM PBS
MEMBER STATIONS AROUND THE
COUNTRY.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, TOMORROW,
THE ROLE OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT,.
HERE IN SILENCE ARE THREE MORE.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, GWEN TALKS WITH
FORMER SECRETARY OF STATE AND
FORMER FIRST LADY HILLARY RODHAM
CLINTON.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND
GOODNIGHT.